when you start any game of Root: The RPG, you have to make
the player characters. Each player (except the GM) makes their
own, and together these PCs constitute the band and the main
cast of your game. So this is not a duty to take lightly!
One important thing to know throughout the process—expect to flesh
everything out as you go. Add details to descriptions and objects. Think
about the questions someone might have about your character, and
think about what the answers are. Never be afraid to add more detail
above and beyond what’s listed on your character sheet—that’s how
full, rich characters are made!
Choosing a Playbook Choosing a Playbook
To make a vagabond PC, you first need to pick a playbook. A playbook
is a particular archetype, a set of ideas bound together as a guideline
for your character—but not a straitjacket. Each playbook has plenty of
room for you to build a unique vagabond!
There are nine playbooks in this book, each corresponding to one
of the vagabonds in Root: A Game of Woodland Might and
Right, Root: The Riverfolk Company Expansion, and Root: The
Underground Expansion. These are the playbooks you’ll find here:
The Adventurer, The Arbiter, The Harrier, The Ranger, The Ronin,
The Scoundrel, The Thief, The Tinker, and The Vagrant. Each player
will pick their own playbook, and no doubling up—each player must
choose a different playbook than the others. That way you’ll have
a band of vagabonds with different traits, different problems, and
different skill sets.
Each playbook is its own unique double-sided sheet. When you make
your character, you’ll print out your particular playbook and write all
the pertinent information on those sheets, using it as the actual record
of all your traits, abilities, equipment, and more, so this book often
uses the terms “playbook” and “character sheet” interchangeably.
For more on the individual playbooks, see page 132.
Example
Derrick is making his new character. He looks at the playbooks to see what
matches his interests. He’d like a socially oriented character—not so much a
fighter—so he’s looking at the Adventurer and the Vagrant. Since Marissa is
interested in playing the Adventurer, though, he decides to take the Vagrant.
42
Root: The Roleplaying Game
Filling Out the Playbook Filling Out the Playbook
While you’re picking your playbook, you should be looking them over a
bit. Once you know exactly which one you’ll play, make sure you have that
whole playbook in front of you. Skim it over, taking a look at your playbook’s
particular elements.
Next, work your way through the playbook, filling out many sections entirely,
making some notes and marks in other sections. You’ll make all of the crucial
decisions to create your character’s core framework through this process. Your
character will continue to change and grow over time, and many parts of your
playbook will change to match—but the decisions you make now will have a
great effect on your character’s identity and capabilities.
Name, Species, Details, and Demeanor
For these sections, you pick your name, your species, your details, and your
demeanor. Choosing these elements can help sketch out the initial skeleton of
your character. You can always revisit these later if you change your mind and
want to pick something that better matches your developing character.
Name
For name, choose one option from the name list on the character creation
worksheet or make up a similar option of your own. You might also have a
nickname, like Scar or Patches, that other denizens call you!
Species
Your species is what kind of animal you are; either pick one option from the list,
or add your own in the blank. There are four common animals in the Woodland—
birds, foxes, mice, and rabbits. Other animals are less common, but the Woodland is
a big place filled with lots of different creatures.
In fact, your species can more or less be anything, with a few limits:
·Don’t pick an animal that is bigger than a wolf in the real world. All denizens
in Root: The RPG are more or less person-sized, but it starts feeling a bit
strange if you bring in larger animals…and in the background of the Woodland,
a lot of the larger animals (deer, bears) are particularly strange or dangerous.
·Don’t choose purely aquatic animals. Amphibious animals can work, but no
fish. The denizens of the Woodland—and the other player characters—are
going to be skewed heavily to land animals. Make sure you’re picking an
animal that can physically interact with the other denizens, and about whom
you won’t be asking every five seconds, “But how do your gills work above
water? How can you breathe?”
Chapter 4: Making Vagabonds 43
Animals don’t come with any special traits or abilities, beyond what makes
sense in the fiction. Birds can fly. Moles can dig. Beavers can chew through
wood. Foxes can scent other animals with ease. And on and on.
These abilities aren’t special—they fit into the existing moves perfectly! When
a bird tries to fly, if there’s no tension and no uncertainty, then she just does.
When she tries to fly to evade a flash flood, well, that sounds like trusting fate,
or attempting the roguish feat of acrobatics. When a mole tries to dig a tunnel,
if there’s no tension and no uncertainty, then he just does. If he needs to dig
a tunnel with perfect secrecy that comes up inside the Mayor’s house…then
maybe he’s attempting the roguish feat of sneaking. And so on.
The biggest effect of choosing a particular species for your character is social.
If you’re a bird, then a lot of denizens will automatically associate you with the
Eyrie Dynasties. If you’re a cat, then they’ll associate you with the Marquisate. If
you’re a rabbit, fox, or mouse, you’ll be seen as a downtrodden, regular denizen
of the Woodland. If you’re a lizard, wolf, toad, anteater, or some other animal
from afar, then you might be viewed with suspicion and mistrust. Everybody in
the Woodland carries their own expectations and prejudices, and unfortunately,
your species affects how others see you, even if you try your best to distance
yourself from those factions.
Details
For details, you have three lines of options with a few details that are mostly
unique to your playbook. Circle at least one option from each line, or fill in your
own and circle it. You can circle more options if you choose for them to apply.
The first line is always the pronouns that your character uses; the second
line is a small physical description of your character, to prime other players
44
Root: The Roleplaying Game
for picturing the character in their heads; and the third line is an interesting
detail or item that you carry, not generally something of great use or particular
advantage, but a trinket that means something to you.
Demeanor
For demeanor, choose one option and circle it, or fill in your own. Demeanor is just
a short cue about your character’s overall bearing and personality. As always, this is
meant to be a prompt, a way to get you started with options that fit your playbook
well—it’s not meant to be a hard limit.
Example
Derrick looks at the name list and likes the sound of “Jinx.” He considers for a
minute making Jinx a mouse, but “opossum” keeps calling to him. Derrick likes
the image of a vagabond who solves problems by playing dead and feels that an
opossum is great for that! He circles it, picturing Jinx as a grey-furred rat-tailed
opossum. But even though the character is an opossum, Jinx doesn’t get any special
advantage by playing dead—instead, Derrick will still roll to trick an NPC when
Jinx tries, and that’s when the Cunning stat will matter—but that’s all something to
think about later.
For details, Derrick chooses from the pronouns line that Jinx uses “they” pronouns,
and “patchwork” from the physical description line sounds good—Derrick sees Jinx
as having patched-up clothes sewn from countless other garments. He likes three
of the trinket options, so he circles all three—“tattered cloak,” “luck charm,” and
“gambling paraphernalia.” The good luck charm feels right, but he’ll figure out what
it is later. He sees the gambling paraphernalia as dice and a cup to roll them.
Background Questions
The background questions are prompts to get you thinking about and filling in
your character’s past. Every vagabond has a past, and those elements are great story
fodder for interesting, dramatic scenes down the line.
Each playbook has five questions, and each question has a few answers you can
select. The five questions are usually the same on every playbook, although
some of the options differ from playbook to playbook. If you feel strongly, you
can answer a question with a different answer from those provided, but you
should see if the presented answers work at all—most of them have plenty of
wiggle room to provide more specifics and further detail.
Where Do You Call Home?
This question is a combination of “where are you from?” and “what place
matters deeply to you?” If you’re a vagabond, you don’t really have a place where
you’re settled, where you live day in and day out. But many vagabonds have a
Chapter 4: Making Vagabonds 45
place in their hearts held in special fondness, whether because they’re from
that place, or because they return to that place when they need to rest for a
time. That’s your home. Saying that it’s one of the clearings means that clearing
is an important place to you; saying it’s the forest means that somewhere in
the wilds of the Woodlands, you have a safe space to rest; and saying that it’s a
place far from here means that you’re likely from elsewhere, not attached to any
particular spaces in the Woodland.
Why Are You a Vagabond?
Every PC in a game of Root: The RPG is a vagabond. That means they don’t
settle down, they keep traveling around the Woodland, and they’ve had to acquire
some degree of skill. But most importantly, they choose to continue being
vagabonds. Answering why you are a vagabond speaks both to the events that
brought you to be a vagabond in the first place, and to the reasons you continue
to be a vagabond today. What’s more, if you find the answer to this question is
ever resolved, then it’s fair to ask if that character would retire and settle down.
If they wouldn’t give up a life of adventuring yet…you need a new reason to keep
being a vagabond.
Whom Have You Left Behind?
Becoming a vagabond always means leaving others behind, one way or another.
Whether it’s friends and family you left behind at your home or it’s a teacher you
left behind as you struck out on your own, there’s someone who meant a great
deal to you whom you left to move throughout the Woodland as a vagabond.
When you choose your answer to this question, you choose a character of
significance to you. Make sure you think about some details for them, like their
name, species, why you left them, and where they might still be found.
Which Faction Have You Served the Most and
With Which Have You Earned a Special Enmity?
Both of these questions have to do with your vagabond’s relationship to the
major factions present in your game. The factions are the powers like the
Marquisate, the Eyrie Dynasties, the Woodland Alliance, and the denizens
themselves. For each of these questions, you choose one faction, establishing
that you’ve either aided them or harmed them in the past through your actions
as a vagabond. Whatever you did, it was no little thing—the faction as a whole
cares about and remembers what you did, to the point that your actions
continue to influence their current feelings about you.
You mark two prestige with the faction you served, and one notoriety with the
faction you harmed. Marking prestige means that you are coming closer to
forming a good reputation with that faction. Marking notoriety means that you
46
Root: The Roleplaying Game
are coming closer to forming a bad reputation with that faction. You can choose
the same faction for both questions if you like—it means you’ve both helped and
injured the same faction. For more on prestige and notoriety, see page 110.
And make sure over the course of character creation you think a bit about
what you did to help or hurt those factions. There are plenty of other places
throughout character creation where you might be able to flesh those details
out, like when you establish your connections with other PCs (page 50) or
when you establish the vagabond band’s daring exploit (page 61), so you
don’t necessarily have to decide right away. But at some point during character
creation (most often when you introduce your character to the other players),
you will explain what you did to help and hurt those two factions, so make sure
it’s percolating as you move forward.
Example
It’s time for Derrick to fill in the background of Jinx. He decides that Jinx is from
somewhere far from here—Jinx is an opossum and they see themself as coming
from a family of opossums living deep in the woods. The reason Jinx is a vagabond,
Derrick decides, is that they are on the run for their lies and tricks. Jinx has run one
too many cons in one too many places; nearly anywhere they’d go, there are probably
a few denizens who might recognize them and try to take retribution.
Derrick also decides that Jinx recently left behind their best friend and former partner
in crime, a combination of two of the answers on the Vagrant playbook. Derrick sees
this friend, named Pell, as another scammer who ultimately settled down and left
the life of endless tricks. He names the clearing Pell still lives in, based on the options
on the map. Finally, Derrick decides that Jinx has served the Woodland Alliance
the most—Jinx’s tricks have been useful for the would-be rebels—and has earned a
special enmity with the denizens themselves. The regular denizens of the Woodland
are annoyed by the Vagrant’s cons. Derrick marks two prestige with the Woodland
Alliance, and one notoriety with the denizens.
Chapter 4: Making Vagabonds 47
The Stats
Every PC in Root: The RPG has five stats that measure, as a rough baseline,
how good they are at particular things. Those five stats are: Charm, Cunning,
Finesse, Luck, and Might.
Charm represents a character’s facility with conversation, dialogue, and social
interaction. The higher Charm a character has, the more likely they are to be
able to persuade NPCs to act as they wish, or to figure out what’s going on in
other characters’ heads.
Cunning represents a character’s craftiness, perceptiveness, and cleverness.
The higher Cunning a character has, the more likely they are to be able to
trick NPCs to act as they wish, or to take in the situation around them and
determine effective courses of action.
Finesse represents a character’s manual dexterity and skill with their hands.
The higher Finesse a character has, the more likely they are to be able to
perform complicated roguish feats and do things like shoot a bow accurately.
Luck represents a character’s sheer willpower, survivability, and, well…luck.
The higher Luck a character has, the more likely they are to be able to scrape
through dangerous or complicated situations more or less intact, but never
without a price.
Might represents a character’s pure physical strength. The higher Might a
character has, the more likely they are to be able to smash apart doors or locks,
or to be absolutely deadly in close-up melee combat.
Your playbook comes with a pre-chosen set of stats, showcasing the particular
kind of character that playbook represents. You can adjust your character’s pre-
chosen set of stats slightly by adding +1 to any one stat of your choice, but you
can’t raise any stat beyond a +2 (right now).
In general, a +0 represents an average stat for a vagabond—which is still better
than most Woodland denizens. Anything below a 0 means that when the
vagabond tries to use that stat, they’re taking a real risk. Anything above a 0
means that when the vagabond tries to use that stat, they’re likely to remain in
control and get what they want.
Example
As a Vagrant, Jinx’s starting stats are Charm +2, Cunning +1, Finesse –1, Might 0,
and Luck 0. Derrick gets to add +1 to any one stat of his choice, as long as he doesn’t
raise it above a +2. Charm’s out, then. Derrick thinks about Luck—he can see Jinx
as someone who’s relied on sheer good luck and will to make it through tough
situations—but he ultimately chooses Cunning so that Jinx can run their tricks with
even greater facility.
48
Root: The Roleplaying Game
Who Decides?
Who decides when you have achieved your drive or followed your nature? Does the
player call it out, or is it the GM’s call?
Ultimately, it’s the GM’s call, but the answer is often somewhere in the middle. If
the GM notices that a vagabond has fulfilled their nature or drive, the GM should
call it out—it’s a chance to get on the same page about how and when it is fulfilled,
and to give that character an appropriate reward for dramatic play. In practice,
though, it’s a lot harder for the GM to keep track of every vagabond’s natures and
drives along with everything else going on in the game. So the most likely course
of events is that the vagabond’s player fulfills their nature or drive and calls it out.
If a player thinks they have hit their condition for a nature or drive, they should
say so aloud. Most of the time, the GM will be on the same page, and everyone
will agree that you’ve fulfilled it. If the GM does disagree, then it’s a good
opportunity to get on the same page about what the drive or nature means. And
if the character’s drive or nature doesn’t feel right anymore, it’s always possible to
change it—see page 177 for more!
Nature & Drives
Every vagabond PC has a nature and two drives. Your nature speaks to your
inner character, a kind of baseline description of what you feel, how you act,
and most importantly, how you relieve stress. Your nature describes a way
that you can clear all of your exhaustion track, usually by getting into trouble
or giving in to some difficult urge. Exhaustion is one of your harm tracks,
measuring how tired your character is; clearing it gives you a burst of energy to
be much more effective. For more on exhaustion, see page 55.
You are never required to follow your nature, but you will likely want to
over the course of play, whether because it makes sense for your character
or because you need to clear your exhaustion track. Pick a nature that you’re
interested in actually following; if you can’t see yourself ever fulfilling your
nature, then it’s not a good choice.
Your drives, on the other hand, speak to deep wants within your character. If
your nature is a kind of dangerous instinct of your vagabond, then your drives are
desires that come up again and again. Your drives each give you a condition by
which you can advance—fulfill the condition, and your vagabond grows just a bit
stronger, just a bit more effective. For more on advancement, see page 170.
You have two drives, and you can advance once for each drive per session.
Similar to your nature, pick drives that you’re interested in pursuing. During
Chapter 4: Making Vagabonds 49
play you will look for opportunities to fulfill your drives and advance, so if
you’re not interested in doing that for a particular drive, it’s not a good choice.
Example
Derrick knows that he wants Jinx to be a tricksy con artist. He looks at the Vagrant’s
two natures, Drunk and Hustler, and instantly chooses Hustler—it fits Jinx’s
mischievous, deceptive manner way better. Then, Derrick looks at the Vagrant’s
drives. Clean Paws kind of speaks to his desire for Jinx to trick other people into
acting how Jinx wants and then appear to be innocent…but he’s most interested in
Chaos and Thrills. Derrick can see Jinx trying to fulfill those drives much more often
during play, so he picks Chaos and Thrills as Jinx’s two drives.